Webassembly on kubernetes with rust (#1036)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2022-01-26-webassembly-on-kubernetes-with-rust.md

---
layout: blog_post
title: "Containerless! How to Run WebAssembly Workloads on Kubernetes with Rust"
author: deepu-sasidharan
by: advocate
communities: [devops, rust]
description: "Learn how to run secure WebAssembly workloads written with Rust on Kubernetes with Krustlet."
tags: [rust, webassembly, kubernetes, security]
tweets:
  - "Do you want to go Containerless on Kubernetes? Learn how to run WebAssembly workloads written in Rust on Kubernetes. #rust #webassembly #kubernetes #security"
  - "Learn how to run secure WebAssembly workloads written with Rust on Kubernetes with Krustlet. #rust #webassembly #kubernetes #security"
  - "Is WebAssembly the future of Kubernetes? Learn all about Wasm on Kubernetes with Rust. #rust #webassembly #kubernetes #security"
image: blog/webassembly-on-kubernetes-with-rust/rust_wasm_k8s.jpg
type: awareness
---

> WebAssembly (Wasm) is one of the most exciting and underestimated software technologies invented in recent times. It's a binary instruction format for a stack-based virtual machine. It aims to execute at native speeds with a memory-safe and secure sandbox. Its portable, cross-platform, and language-agnostic. It's designed as a compilation target for languages. Though originally part of the open web platform, it has found use cases beyond the web. WebAssembly is now used in browsers, Node.js, Deno, Kubernetes, and IoT platforms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WebAssembly (Wasm) is one of the most exciting and underestimated software technologies invented in recent times. It's a binary instruction format for a stack-based virtual machine that aims to execute at native speeds with a memory-safe and secure sandbox. Wasm is portable, cross-platform, and language-agnostic—designed as a compilation target for languages. Though originally part of the open web platform, it has found use cases beyond the web. WebAssembly is now used in browsers, Node.js, Deno, Kubernetes, and IoT platforms.
```
Great intro paragraph - these suggestions break up the repetitive use of "It is..." to start the sentences for ease of reading. Also for variation of sentence length.

You can learn more about WebAssembly at [WebAssembly.org](https://webassembly.org/).

# WebAssembly on Kubernetes

> WebAssembly, though initially designed for [the web](https://www.w3.org/wasm/), proved to be an ideal format for writing platform and language agnostic applications. You are used to something similar in the container world, Docker containers. People figured WebAssembly is so similar and even more efficient since it's fast, portable, and secure, running at native speeds. This means that you can use WebAssembly alongside containers as workloads on Kubernetes. This was made possible by another WebAssembly initiative known as [WebAssembly System Interface (WASI)](https://wasi.dev/) and the [Wasmtime](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wasmtime) project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Though initially designed for [the web](https://www.w3.org/wasm/), WebAssembly proved to be an ideal format for writing platform and language-agnostic applications. You may be aware of something similar in the container world—Docker containers. People, including Docker co-founder Solomon Hykes, recognized the similarity and acknowledged that WebAssembly is even more efficient since it's fast, portable, and secure, running at native speeds. This means that you can use WebAssembly alongside containers as workloads on Kubernetes. Another WebAssembly initiative known as [WebAssembly System Interface (WASI)](https://wasi.dev/) along with the [Wasmtime](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wasmtime) project make this possible.
```
This avoids assuming that your readers know certain things, even if it's likely they  do (this is an 'inclusivity' best practice). I also wanted to connect this paragraph to the embedded tweet and ID the person who tweeted it. Last sentence I changed from passive to active voice.

{% twitter 1111004913222324225 %}

> WebAssembly on Kubernetes is relatively new and has some rough edges at the moment, but it's already proving to be revolutionary. Wasm workloads can be extremely fast as they can execute faster than a container takes to start; they are sandboxed and hence much more secure than containers; they are way smaller in size due to the binary format than containers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WebAssembly on Kubernetes is relatively new and has some rough edges at the moment, but it's already proving to be revolutionary. Wasm workloads can be extremely fast as they can execute faster than a container takes to start. The workloads are sandboxed and hence much more secure than containers; they are way smaller in size due to the binary format than containers.
```
breaking a long complex sentence into two.

> If you want to learn more about WASI, check out [the announcement from Mozilla](https://hacks.mozilla.org/2019/03/standardizing-wasi-a-webassembly-system-interface/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to learn more about WASI, check out [the original announcement from Mozilla](https://hacks.mozilla.org/2019/03/standardizing-wasi-a-webassembly-system-interface/).
```
clarification since the announcement is a few years old now...

# Why Rust?

> I previously wrote a blog post about [why Rust is a great language for the future](https://deepu.tech/my-second-impression-of-rust/), Tl;Dr; Rust is a secure and fast language without the compromises of most modern languages, and Rust has the [best ecosystem and tooling](https://rustwasm.github.io/docs/book/) for WebAssembly. So Rust + Wasm makes it super secure and fast.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I previously wrote a blog post about [why Rust is a great language for the future](https://deepu.tech/my-second-impression-of-rust/), Tl;Dr; Rust is secure and fast without the compromises of most modern languages, and Rust has the [best ecosystem and tooling](https://rustwasm.github.io/docs/book/) for WebAssembly. So Rust + Wasm makes it super secure and fast.
```
simplifies: removes repetition of 'language'

# Enter Krustlet

> [Krustlet](https://krustlet.dev/) is a [Kubelet](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/kubelet/) written in Rust for WebAssembly workloads (written in any language). It listens for new pods assigned to it based on `tolerations` specified on the manifest and runs them. Since the default Kubernetes nodes cannot run Wasm workloads natively, you need a Kubelet that can, and this is where Krustlet comes in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Krustlet](https://krustlet.dev/) is a [Kubelet](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/kubelet/) written in Rust for WebAssembly workloads (written in any language). It listens for new pods assignments based on `tolerations` specified on the manifest and runs them. Since the default Kubernetes nodes cannot run Wasm workloads natively, you need a Kubelet that can, and this is where Krustlet comes in.
```
eliminates the 2nd possibly ambiguous use of "it"

# Run WebAssembly workloads on Kubernetes with Krustlet

Today, you will use Krustlet to run a Wasm workload written in Rust on Kubernetes.

**Prerequisites**

- [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/)
- [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/)
- [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start/#installation) or another local kubernetes distribution
- [Rust toolkit](https://www.rust-lang.org/learn/get-started) (Includes rustup, rustc, and cargo)

## Preparing the cluster

> First, you need to prepare a cluster and install Krustlet on the cluster to run WebAssembly on it. I'm using [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/) to run a local Kubernetes cluster, you can also use [MiniKube](https://docs.krustlet.dev/howto/krustlet-on-minikube/), [MicroK8s](https://docs.krustlet.dev/howto/krustlet-on-microk8s/), or [another Kubernetes distribution](https://docs.krustlet.dev/intro/quickstart/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, you need to prepare a cluster and install Krustlet on the cluster to run WebAssembly on it. I'm using [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/) to run a local Kubernetes cluster; you can also use [MiniKube](https://docs.krustlet.dev/howto/krustlet-on-minikube/), [MicroK8s](https://docs.krustlet.dev/howto/krustlet-on-microk8s/), or [another Kubernetes distribution](https://docs.krustlet.dev/intro/quickstart/).
```
using the semi-colon to separate your tool choice from a comma-separated series of other suggestions.

The first step is to create a cluster with the below command:

```bash
kind create cluster
```

> Now you need to bootstrap Krustlet, and you will need `kubectl` installed and a kubeconfig that has access to create `Secrets` in the `kube-system` namespace and can approve `CertificateSigningRequests`. You can use these [handy scripts](https://github.com/krustlet/krustlet/tree/main/scripts) from Krustlet to download and run the appropriate setup script for your OS:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you need to bootstrap Krustlet. For this, you will need `kubectl` installed and a kubeconfig that has access to create `Secrets` in the `kube-system` namespace and can approve `CertificateSigningRequests`. You can use these [handy scripts](https://github.com/krustlet/krustlet/tree/main/scripts) from Krustlet to download and run the appropriate setup script for your OS:
```
Simplify by making into 2 sentences.

```bash
# Setup for Linux/macOS
curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/krustlet/krustlet/main/scripts/bootstrap.sh | /bin/bash
```

Now you can install and run Krustlet.

Download a binary release from the [release page](https://github.com/krustlet/krustlet/releases) and run it. Download the appropriate version for your OS.

```bash
# Download for Linux
curl -O https://krustlet.blob.core.windows.net/releases/krustlet-v1.0.0-alpha.1-linux-amd64.tar.gz
tar -xzf krustlet-v1.0.0-alpha.1-linux-amd64.tar.gz
# Install for Linux
KUBECONFIG=~/.krustlet/config/kubeconfig \
  ./krustlet-wasi \
  --node-ip=172.17.0.1 \
  --node-name=krustlet \
  --bootstrap-file=${HOME}/.krustlet/config/bootstrap.conf
```

> **Note**: If you use Docker for Mac, the node-ip would be different. Follow [the instructions from the Krustlet docs](https://docs.krustlet.dev/howto/krustlet-on-kind/#special-note-docker-desktop-for-mac) to figure out the IP. If you get the error "krustlet-wasi cannot be opened because the developer cannot be verified", you can allow it with the `allow anyway` button found at `System Preferences` > `Security & Privacy` > `General` on macOS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note**: If you use Docker for Mac, the node-ip will be different. Follow [the instructions from the Krustlet docs](https://docs.krustlet.dev/howto/krustlet-on-kind/#special-note-docker-desktop-for-mac) to figure out the IP. If you get the error "krustlet-wasi cannot be opened because the developer cannot be verified," you can allow it with the `allow anyway` button found at `System Preferences` > `Security & Privacy` > `General` on macOS.
```
conditional tense not needed here (thus, would-> will)
in US English, the guideline is usually comma goes inside the quotes, British English is the reverse. Sigh...

> You should see a prompt to manually approve TLS certs since the serving certs used by Krustlet need to be manually approved. Open a new terminal and run the below command. The hostname will be shown in the prompt from the Krustlet server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should see a prompt to manually approve TLS certs since the serving certs Krustlet uses must be manually approved. Open a new terminal and run the below command. The hostname will be shown in the prompt from the Krustlet server.
```
avoids passive voice, and simplifies.

```bash
kubectl certificate approve <hostname>-tls
```

This will be required only for the first time when you start the Krustlet. Keep the Krustlet server running. You might see some errors being logged, but let's ignore it for now as Krustlet is still in beta, and there are some rough edges.

> Let's see if the node is available. Run `kubectl get nodes`, and you should see something like below

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's see if the node is available. Run `kubectl get nodes`, and you should see something like this: 
```
missing punctuation. Also, InfoDev Style Guide re: use of above/below (sometimes it's pretty easy to avoid using, other times less so): https://oktawiki.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/DOC/pages/722929640/InfoDev+Style+Guide#1.-Guidance-on-writing-and-style

krustlet             Ready    <none>                 12m   1.0.0-alpha.1   172.17.0.1    <none>        <unknown>      <unknown>                 mvp
```

Now let's test if the Krustlet is working as expected by applying the Wasm workload below. As you can see, we have `tolerations` defined so that this will not be scheduled on normal nodes.

```yml
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: hello-wasm
spec:
  containers:
  - name: hello-wasm
    image: webassembly.azurecr.io/hello-wasm:v1
  tolerations:
  - effect: NoExecute
    key: kubernetes.io/arch
    operator: Equal
    value: wasm32-wasi   # or wasm32-wasmcloud according to module target arch
  - effect: NoSchedule
    key: kubernetes.io/arch
    operator: Equal
    value: wasm32-wasi
EOF
```

Once applied, run `kubectl get pods` as shown below, and you should see the pod running on the Krustlet node.

```bash
kubectl get pods --field-selector spec.nodeName=krustlet
# Output
NAME                    READY   STATUS       RESTARTS   AGE
hello-wasm              0/1     ExitCode:0   0          71m
```

> Don't worry about the status. It's [normal](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/72020) for a workload that terminates normally to have `ExitCode:0`. Let's check the logs for the pod by running `kubectl logs`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Don't worry about the status. It's [normal](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/72020) for a workload that terminates normally to have `ExitCode:0`. Let's check the logs for the pod by running `kubectl logs`.
```
adds period

```bash
kubectl logs hello-wasm
# Output
Hello, World!
```

> You have successfully setup a Kubelet that can run Wasm workloads on your cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You have successfully set up a Kubelet that can run Wasm workloads on your cluster.
```
set up as verb - two words

## Setting up Rust for WebAssembly

Now let us prepare an environment for WebAssembly with Rust. Make sure you are using a stable Rust version and not a nightly release.

> First, you need to add `wasm32-wasi` target for rust so that you can compile Rust apps to WebAssembly. Run the below command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, you need to add `wasm32-wasi` target for Rust so that you can compile Rust apps to WebAssembly. Run the below command:
```
capitalize

```bash
rustup target add wasm32-wasi
```

> Now you can create a new Rust application with cargo.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you can create a new Rust application with Cargo.
```
Capitalize

```bash
cargo new --bin rust-wasm
```

Open the created `rust-wasm` folder in your favorite IDE. I use Visual Studio Code with the fantastic [rust-analyzer](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=matklad.rust-analyzer) and [CodeLLDB](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=vadimcn.vscode-lldb) plugins to develop in Rust.

## Create the WebAssembly workload

> Let's write a small service that will print random cat facts on the console. For this, you could use a free public [API that provides random cat facts](https://catfact.ninja/fact) for this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's write a small service that will print random cat facts on the console. For this, you could use a free public [API that provides random cat facts](https://catfact.ninja/fact).
```
typo

```rust
use http;
use serde_json::Value;
use std::{str, thread, time};

fn main() {
    env_logger::init();
    let url = "https://catfact.ninja/fact".to_string();
    loop {
        let req = http::request::Builder::new()
            .method(http::Method::GET)
            .uri(&url)
            .header("Content-Type", "text/plain");
        let req = req.body(None).unwrap();

        log::debug!("Request: {:?}", req);

        // send request using the experimental bindings for http on wasi
        let mut res = wasi_experimental_http::request(req).expect("cannot make request");

        let response_body = res.body_read_all().unwrap();
        let response_text = str::from_utf8(&response_body).unwrap().to_string();
        let headers = res.headers_get_all().unwrap();

        log::debug!("{}", res.status_code);
        log::debug!("Response: {:?} {:?}", headers, response_text);

        // parse the response to json
        let cat_fact: Value = serde_json::from_str(&response_text).unwrap();

        log::info!("Cat Fact: {}", cat_fact["fact"].as_str().unwrap());

        thread::sleep(time::Duration::new(60, 0));
    }
}
```

> The code is simple. It makes a GET request to the API and parses and prints the response every 60 seconds. Now you can build this into a Wasm binary using the below cargo command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code is simple. It makes a GET request to the API and parses and prints the response every 60 seconds. Now you can build this into a Wasm binary using this Cargo command:
```
Cargo

```bash
cargo build --release --target wasm32-wasi
```

That's it. You have successfully created a WebAssembly binary using Rust.

## Run the workload locally (optional)

> Let's run the workload locally using [wasmtime](https://wasmtime.dev), a small JIT-style runtime for Wasm and WASI. Since wasmtime doesn't support networking out of the box, we need to use the [wrapper](https://github.com/deislabs/wasi-experimental-http#testing-using-the-wasmtime-http-binary) provided by [wasi-experimental-http](https://github.com/deislabs/wasi-experimental-http). You can build it from source it using the below command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's run the workload locally using [Wasmtime](https://wasmtime.dev), a small JIT-style runtime for Wasm and WASI. Since Wasmtime doesn't support networking out of the box, we need to use the [wrapper](https://github.com/deislabs/wasi-experimental-http#testing-using-the-wasmtime-http-binary) provided by [wasi-experimental-http](https://github.com/deislabs/wasi-experimental-http). You can build it from source using the below command.
```
Capitalize Wasmtime. remove extra "it"

```bash
git clone https://github.com/deislabs/wasi-experimental-http.git
# Build for your platform
cargo build
# move to any location that is added to your PATH variable
mv ./target/debug/wasmtime-http ~/bin/wasmtime-http
```

Now run the below command from the `rust-wasm` project folder:

```bash
wasmtime-http target/wasm32-wasi/release/rust-wasm.wasm -a https://catfact.ninja/fact -e RUST_LOG=info
```

## Run the workload in Kubernetes

> Before you can run the workload in Kubernetes, you need to push the binary to a registry that supports OCI artifacts. OCI complaint registries can be used for any OCI artifact, including Docker images, Wasm binaries, and so on. Docker Hub currently does not support OCI artifacts; hence you can use another registry like [GitHub Package Registry](https://github.com/features/packages), [Azure Container Registry](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-in/services/container-registry/) or [Google Artifact Registry](https://cloud.google.com/artifact-registry). I'll be using GitHub Package Registry as it's the simplest to get started, and most of you might already have a GitHub account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you can run the workload in Kubernetes, you need to push the binary to a registry that supports OCI artifacts. OCI-compliant registries can be used for any OCI artifact, including Docker images, Wasm binaries, and so on. Docker Hub currently does not support OCI artifacts; hence you can use another registry like [GitHub Package Registry](https://github.com/features/packages), [Azure Container Registry](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-in/services/container-registry/) or [Google Artifact Registry](https://cloud.google.com/artifact-registry). I'll be using GitHub Package Registry as it's the simplest to get started, and most of you might already have a GitHub account.
```
typo

First, you need to log in to GitHub Package Registry using `docker login`. Create a [personal access token on GitHub](https://github.com/settings/tokens) with the `write:packages` scope and use that to log in to the registry.

```bash
export CR_PAT=<your-token>
echo $CR_PAT | docker login ghcr.io -u <Your GitHub username> --password-stdin
```

Now you need to push your Wasm binary as an OCI artifact; for this, you can use the [wasm-to-oci](https://github.com/engineerd/wasm-to-oci/releases) CLI. Use the below command to install it on your machine. Download the appropriate version for your OS.

```bash
# Install for Linux
curl -LO https://github.com/engineerd/wasm-to-oci/releases/download/v0.1.2/linux-amd64-wasm-to-oci
# move to any location that is added to your PATH variable
mv linux-amd64-wasm-to-oci ~/bin/wasm-to-oci
```

Now you can push the binary you built earlier to the GitHub Package Registry. Run the below command from the `rust-wasm` folder.

```bash
wasm-to-oci push target/wasm32-wasi/release/rust-wasm.wasm ghcr.io/<your GitHub user>/rust-wasm:latest
```

> You should see a successful message. Now check your GitHub packages page on your profile, and you should see the artifact listed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should see a successful message. Now check the GitHub Packages page on your profile, and you should see the artifact listed.
```
no need to repeat "your" 
GitHub Packages capitalized as name of product/page UI

```

**Note**: Remember to replace `<your GitHub user>` with your own GitHub username.

The `annotations` and `tolerations` are significant. The annotations are used to allow external network calls from the krustlet, and the tolerations limit the pod to only schedule/run on Wasm nodes. We are also passing some environment variables that the application will use.

Now apply the manifest using the below command and check the pod status.

```bash
kubectl apply -f k8s.yaml

kubectl get pods -o wide
# Output
NAME                READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE     IP       NODE       NOMINATED NODE   READINESS GATES
rust-wasi-example   1/1     Running   0          6m50s   <none>   krustlet   <none>           <none>
```

You should see the Wasm workload running successfully on the Krustlet node. Let's check the logs.

```bash
kubectl logs rust-wasi-example
# Output
[2022-01-16T11:42:20Z INFO  rust_wasm] Cat Fact: Polydactyl cats (a cat with 1-2 extra toes on their paws) have this as a result of a genetic mutation. These cats are also referred to as 'Hemingway cats' because writer Ernest Hemingway reportedly owned dozens of them at his home in Key West, Florida.

> [2022-01-16T11:43:21Z INFO  rust_wasm] Cat Fact: The way you treat kittens in the early stages of it's life will render it's personality traits later in life.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[2022-01-16T11:43:21Z INFO  rust_wasm] Cat Fact: The way you treat a kitten in the early stages of its life will render its personality traits later in life.
```
apostrophes not needed, this is not the contraction "it is" - it's the possessive. Can we help make the cat facts API use better grammar? ;-) maybe not...

Author: :rofl:

Author: I didn't change its since it was output from API, but its fine

```

Awesome. You have successfully created a Wasm workload using Rust and deployed it to a Kubernetes cluster without using containers.
If you'd like to take a look at this solution in full, check out the [GitHub repo](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-rust-webassembly-k8s-example).

# So, are we ready to replace containers with WebAssembly?

> WebAssembly on Kubernetes is still not production-ready as a lot of the supporting ecosystem is still experimental, and WASI itself is still maturing. [Networking is still not stable](https://radu-matei.com/blog/towards-sockets-networking-wasi/) and the library ecosystem is only just coming along. Krustlet is also still in beta, and there is no straightforward way to run networking workloads, especially servers on it. [WasmEdge](https://wasmedge.org/) is another more mature solution for networking workloads, but it's much more involved to setup and run than Krustlet on Kubernetes. [WasmCloud](https://wasmcloud.dev/) is another project to keep an eye on. So, for the time being, Krustlet is suitable for running workloads for Jobs and use cases involving cluster monitoring and so on, and these are areas you could use the extra performance anyway.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WebAssembly on Kubernetes is not yet production-ready as a lot of the supporting ecosystem is still experimental, and WASI itself is still maturing. [Networking is not yet stable](https://radu-matei.com/blog/towards-sockets-networking-wasi/) and the library ecosystem is only just coming along. Krustlet is also still in beta, and there is no straightforward way to run networking workloads, especially servers on it. [WasmEdge](https://wasmedge.org/) is a more mature alternative solution for networking workloads, but it's much more involved to set up and run than Krustlet on Kubernetes. [WasmCloud](https://wasmcloud.dev/) is another project to keep an eye on. So, for the time being, Krustlet is suitable for running workloads for jobs and use cases involving cluster monitoring and so on. These are areas where you could use the extra performance anyway.
```
avoiding the repetition of "still" and "another" with some synonyms
closing w/a shorter sentence

> So while Wasm on Kubernetes is exciting and containerless on Kubernetes is definitely on the horizon. Currently, containerized applications are still the way for production use, especially for networking workloads like microservices and web applications. But given how fast the ecosystem is evolving, especially in the Rust + Wasm + WASI space, soon we will be able to use Wasm workloads on Kubernetes for production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, while Wasm on Kubernetes is exciting, and containerless on Kubernetes is definitely on the horizon.  containerized applications are still the way to go for production use. This is especially true for networking workloads like microservices and web applications. But, given how fast the ecosystem is evolving, especially in the Rust + Wasm + WASI space, soon I expect we will be able to use Wasm workloads on Kubernetes for production.
```

Avoiding the sentence fragment in the opening - you need the other part of the "while this... then that" structure.
